# Google Data Analytics Capstone Project: Bellabeat Case Study 

This is another optional capstone project from the final course of the [Google Data Analytics Professional Certificate](https://www.coursera.org/professional-certificates/google-data-analytics) on Coursera. 

## INTRODUCTION
For this case study, I have been asked to perform many real-world tasks of a junior data analyst working in the marketing analyst team at Bellabeat, a high-tech manufacturer of heatlh-focused products for women. In order to answer the key business questions, I will follow the steps of the data analysis process: **ask**, **prepare**, **process**, **analyze**, **share**, and **act**.

***MySQL Queries***:

***Data visualization***:

## STEP 1: ASK
### How Can a Wellness Technology Complany Play It Smart?

### 1a. Background
Bellabeat, a high-tech company that manufactures health-focused smart products, was founded in 2013 by Urška Sršen and Sando Mur. Bellabeat smart products collect data on activity, sleep, stress, reproductive health, and more to empower women with knowledge about their own health and habits. 

Sršen believes that an analysis of Bellabeat's available consumer data would reveal more opportunities for growth. She has asked the marketing analytics team to focus on a Bellabeat product and analyze smart device usage data of non-Bellabeat smart devices in order to gain insight into how people are already using their smart devices. Then, using this information, she would like high-level recommendations for how these trends can inform Bellabeat marketing strategy.

### 1b. Business Objectives
1. What are some trends in smart device usage?
2. How could these trends apply to Bellabeat customers?
3. How could these trends help influence Bellabeat marketing strategy?

### 1c. Business Task
To determine how consumers are using non-Bellabeat smart devices in order to design a new marketing strategy that can be applied to one of the Bellabeat products based on the insights found from analysis of non-Bellabeat smart devices.

### 1d. Key Stakeholders 
- **Urška Sršen**: Bellabeat's cofounder and Chief Creative Officer
- **Sando Mur**: Mathematician and Bellabeat's cofounder; key member of the Bellabeat executive team

## STEP 2: PREPARE
### 2a. Data Source
Sršen encourages me to use public data that explores users' daily habits. The dataset for this case study will be the [Fitbit Fitness Tracker Data](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/arashnic/fitbit) (CC0: Public Domain) that is found on Kaggle. This dataset is made available through [Mobius](https://www.kaggle.com/arashnic).

### 2b. Description of Dataset
- Generated by respondents from a distributed survey via Amazon Mechanical Turk between March 12, 2016 and May 12, 2016
- Consists of 18 files that contains personal tracker information from 30 fitbit users which includes, but is not limited to: minute-level output for physical activity, heart rate, and sleep monitoring, daily activity, and steps.

### 2c. Does the Data ROCCC?
A good data source is: **R**eliable, **O**riginal, **C**omprehensive, **C**urrent, and **C**ited. In other words, it ROCCC's! I will examine the dataset based on these five factors to determine if the dataset is a good source of data.
- **Reliable** 
   - LOW - The dataset consists of a small sample of fitbit users which will weaken the analysis. In addition to this, some of the files in the dataset do not contain information for all the fitbit users. For example, one of the files contains data on only eight fitbit users.
- **Orginal**
  - LOW - A third party provider, Amazon Mechanical Turk, is used to collect the data 
- **Comprehensive**
  - LOW to MED - The dataset contains some factors (e.g. sleep, activity) that are important to Bellabeat products and which will be significant in the analysis phase. However, the dataset is still with limitations since it does not consider other factors (e.g. stress, hydration levels, reproductive health, diet, etc.) which would strengthen the analysis. 
- **Current**
  - LOW - The data was collected in 2016, which means this dataset is over 7 years old. 
- **Cited**
  - LOW - The data was collected by Amazon Mechanical Turk, a third party provider. While the dataset was made available through [Mobius](https://www.kaggle.com/arashnic), and is expected to be updated annually, the dataset is still outdated. 

Overall, the dataset is considered to be of poor quality and most likely will not be useful in producing strong recommendations for the company. 
  
### 2d. Final Selection of Data Files 
Fifteen files were excluded from the proceeding steps.

**Reasons for excluding 15 files include:** 
- Some files did not seem useful in answering the business objectives
- Some files had data on minute-level output which would be difficult to analyze
- Some of the data found in multiple files (e.g. dailyCalories, dailySteps) were found combined in a single file (e.g. dailyActivities), so the file which had data separated into multiple files were not needed
- Some files were inconsistent and did not include data on all of the fitbit users. For example, the weightLogInfo file contained data on only 8 users.

Four files were considered for the proceeding steps.

**Final Data Selection**
1. dailyActivity_merged.csv
2. hourlyCalories_merged.csv
3. hourlySteps_merged.csv
4. sleepDay_merged.csv

## STEP 3: PROCESS
### 3a. Initial Cleaning in Excel
To account for easier import into MySQl, I did some initial cleaning of each file in Excel by completing the following:
1. *Checked if each column had the appropriate data types*
   - A custom date consistent with MySQL had to be applied to the date columns in each file. In dailyActivity_merged and sleepDay_merged, a custom date format ("YYYY-MM-DD") was applied to the activity_date and sleep_day column, respectively. In hourlyCalories_merged and hourlySteps_merged, a custom datetime format ("YYYY-MM-DD hh:mm:ss") was applied to the activity_hour column. 
   - The rest of the columns in each file consisted of the appropriate data types.
   - **NOTE:** The data files only contains data from April 12, 2016 to May 12, 2016, when it was mentioned that the dataset would contain data starting from *March 12, 2016*. 

2. *Checked for missing/null values*
   - There were no missing or null values.

3. *Created additional columns*
   - I added two new columns (total_active_minutes, total_active_hours) to dailyActivity_merged. The *total_active_minutes* column was found by adding the very_active_minutes, fairly_active_minutes, lightly_active_minutes, and sedentary_minutes columns in order to determine how many total minutes was spent. The *total_active_hours* column consists of the total_active_minutes but in hours and it was found by dividing the total_active_minutes by 60.
   
### 3b. Further Cleaning in MySQL
**MySQL Query:**
1. *Examination of Each Table*
   - Once the initial cleaning was complete in Excel, the files were uploaded to MySQL in the form of tables. Each table represented a single data file. 
   - In total, there were four tables and each table was first examined by: 1) determining the number of unique IDs and 2) the number of times each user logged their personal tracker information out of 31 days. 
   - There were 33 unique IDs in the daily_activity, hourly_calories, and hourly_steps table, which is three more than the expected 30 users.
   - There were 24 unique IDs in the sleep_day table which is six less than the expected 30 users. Because of this, the sleepDay_merged file was **not included** in the proceeding steps since there is not enough data in this file for a strong analysis. 
   
2. *Joining Tables*
   - The hourly_calories and hourly_steps table was joined to create a new table called, hourly_calories_and_steps. This was done in order to examine the relationship between calories and steps on a hour to hour basis.
   
3. *Deleting Columns and Creating New Columns to Tables*
   - In the daily_activity table, the tracker_distance and logged_activities_distance columns were dropped since they will not be relevant to the analysis. A *day_of_the_week* and *month* column were created in order to explore any differences that may exist between the days of the week or among the months. 
   - In the hourly_calories_and_steps table, a *time_of_day* column was created in order to explore any differences that may exist among the hours of the day. 

## STEP 4: ANALYZE
**MySQL Query**:  

The business task is to determine how consumers are using non-Bellabeat smart devices in order to design a new marketing strategy that can be applied to one of the Bellabeat products based on the insights found from analysis of non-Bellabeat smart devices. 

**To examine how consumers are using non-Bellabeat smart devices I...**
- Calculated the average of each column (total_steps, total_distance, very_active_minutes, etc.) in the daily_activity table by the day of the week and the month 
- Calculated the sum and average of each column (calories and steps) in the hourly_calories_and_steps table by the time of day 

